I can remember a time not too long ago
when people used to really complain that
there were no more public intellectuals
and I think some people are tempted now
to hold the new generation of public
intellectuals to a very low standard
because they're just so delighted that
these people exist at all that they're
on TV at all that they're on the radio I
see that a lot with guys like Noam
Chomsky to be perfectly honest a lot of
his supporters not necessarily even
because their left-wing a lot of people
just feel delighted that someone who's a
seemingly respectable university
professor saying seemingly
intellectually sophisticated things
manages to get into the mainstream media
and they celebrate that fact but really
we should hold them to the same high
standards they proposed for themselves
and a guy like Michael Shermer has
emerged lately from what I would call
the new atheist movement the attempt to
kind of repackage atheism and secularism
as some kind of political cause in the
United States he has emerged as a public
intellectual as someone who comments on
politics and who frames himself as a
moral and ethical philosopher in our
times so given that high standard please
consider the following quotation that
I'm going to read to you that's sounds
like something you might expect to see I
don't know written in a chat room on a
reddit page by some anonymous commenter
quote I don't mind eating cows and fish
but dolphins and whales have big brains
and they're cool so I don't think we
should kill them period close quote
ladies and gentlemen Michael Shermer
leader of the reason rally proponent of
so-called critical thinking says I don't
mind eating cows and fish but dolphins
and whales have big brains and they're
cruel so I don't think we should kill
them I will provide the link below this
video
to the contacts that comes from from my
perspective the paragraph that's
embedded in does not make it sound any
better I think it makes it sound rather
worse he says oh well you know I Drive a
sport utility vehicle because I haul
around bicycles books and dogs but as
soon as there's a hybrid available and
the right size I'll buy it instead
weakness and strength are not a morally
neutral things one of the strange
influences in our culture I think is
that so many of us grew up reading comic
books reading about Batman Superman
these types of characters with a
question of strength the question of
ability is never the the moral puzzle
for people it's striking to me here with
Shermer
and also in reading and listening to god
with sam harris boy i'm almost proud
that i've forgotten that guy's name the
material from sam harris lately I'm
really struck by the the apparent
weakness of these men the the hyper
indulgent ISM the the tremendous
inability to put off to defer even the
slightest of pleasures for the sake of a
moral principle that was in sam Harris's
excuses for not being vegan before and
it's in michael schirmer's excuses for
not being vegan now I remember some
comments from Sam Harris where he was
talking about his problems with the the
morality of what cellular phones are
made from because cellular phones use
minerals that come from certain conflict
zones and the guy interviewing him
pointed oh you know there's this website
where you can buy a morally sourced
cell phone then the cell phone
apparently they give you a guarantee and
they if you want to you can look through
all the fine print they tell you where
all the components come from they
guarantee none of them are produced by
slave labor if from the mines
through to the factories they all meet
certain conditions so if you want to you
can go to this website you can get cell
phones that have this seal of approval
and theses response is I don't believe
that being a morally good person should
mean that you have to have a bad
phone so so your your morality is is not
a sufficiently high priority in your
life that you would be willing to get a
slightly less fashionable a slightly
less fleek a slightly less featured
cellular phone than the one you were now
using let me let you in on a little
secret folks you may have noticed I have
these books sitting around my desk all
the time and I'm always complaining that
I look exhausted when I'm on camera
because I am exhausted and so on I have
never owned a cellular phone
never in my life when I was in China
once I borrowed somebody's cellular
phone for uh I guess about two weeks
that's it that's the only experience
I've ever had and I needed that sort of
phone because I was I was looking for
work I was trying to get a job and I
couldn't get any other kind of phone
number no other exceptions so I'm not
telling you how to notice cellular phone
but actually I was using my girlfriend's
phone all this time with no you know
it's possible to live in the 21st
century without a cellular phone and I
feel I don't feel I lead a less
meaningful life goes but I feel a little
more meaningful life anyway again if
you're just some anonymous guy
commenting on a on an Internet message
board okay fine I'm not gonna hold you
to some terribly high standard but these
guys put themselves forward as major
intellectuals in positions of public
leadership and this is both the
stupidity of what they have to say on
some of the crucial
moral issues of our time moral issues we
can actually make a difference about I
mean I'm sorry you know if you want to
have an opinion about Isis the odds are
you're not one of the people whose
opinion matters is gonna make any kind
of a difference you want to have a
pinion about veganism it's gonna make a
difference for university professor like
Michael Shermer is you want to have
opinion about vivisection on your campus
in your university where you're a member
of tenured faculty that's going to make
a difference
you can stop buying leather today
you can stop eating meat tomorrow you
know you can go vegan now this is a
positive difference in the world that is
within your power to make all kinds of
other questions are merely hypothetical
there's another article that Michael
Shermer wrote on this in which he
reflects that he saw some documentary
film might as well get it right
speciesism the movie I've seen him
comment elsewhere on the internet that
he did see Earthlings and had some kind
of emotional reaction to it so he'd
watched these various probe vegan
documentary films he has his kind of
humming and hawing and response to it
yeah
just just to digress for half a moment
here where is Michael Shermer live
Altadena California a suburb of Los
Angeles a short drive or a long bicycle
ride outside of downtown Los Angeles
there were probably fewer places in the
world that it was easier to be vegan
than the suburbs of LA honestly look
honestly I used to live in a society one
in the middle of Canada it's tough to be
vegan as a schedule it is I used to live
in the south of France
it's very different but in some ways
being vegan and so the France also is
tough Los Angeles Southern California
how low a priority are these moral
principles that you preach you Michael
Shermer you I mean these guys again if
if it was somebody else if this was the
coach of a football team I was quoting
saying whoa a little more didn't cows
and fish but dolphins and whales have
big brains and they're cool so I don't
think we should kill them if that was
the the coach of you know the the
Oakland Raiders I'm dating myself with
that cultural reference Oakland Raiders
nobody would complain okay but you're
putting yourself forward as a major
public intellectual author raconteur
leader of a social movement and this is
the level of engagement of this okay so
in the second link of providing below
the video
he has his sort of indifferent attitude
towards these issues he's just seen in a
documentary film and he comments that
various people make the analogy between
treatment of cows and pigs and
slaughterhouses and what happened in the
Holocaust the extermination of Jews
during World War two during the Nazi
period in Central Europe and Eastern
Europe and all over the place ah you
know what I'm talking about
quote historian Charles Patterson draws
the analogy in his 2002 book eternal
Treblinka and DeVries makes a visual
reference to it by comparing the layout
of factory farm buildings to that of
prisoner barracks at Auschwitz the flaw
in the analogy is in the motivation of
the perpetrators as someone who has
written a book on the Holocaust titled
denying history 2009 I see a vast moral
gulf between farmers and Nazis even
factory form pardon me
even factory farm corporate suits
motivated by profits are still far down
the moral ladder from out Adolf Eichmann
and Heinrich Himmler there are no signs
at factory farms reading Arbeit macht
frei yet I cannot fully rebuke those who
equate factory farms with concentration
camps while working as a graduate
student in experimental psychology in an
animal lab in 1978 at California State
University it was my job to dispose of
lab rats that had outlived our
experiments I was instructed to you thin
out and euthanize them with chloroform
but I hesitated I wanted to take them up
into the local hills and let them go
figuring that death by predation or
starvation was better than gassing but
releasing lab animals was illegal so I
exterminated them with gas it was one of
the most dreadful things I ever had
do close quote uh yeah there were many
differences between the production of
meat on factory farms and the Holocaust
you know what one of them is um Michael
sure if I had to ask you to join the
army and fight in a war in which you
would quite likely be injured or die to
end the Holocaust I would be asking
quite a lot of you if you were in France
and I asked you to join a unit of the
French Resistance to in effect join a a
terrorist group fighting against the
Nazis to live in secrecy to live a
double life to smuggle munitions perhaps
across the border into France to fight
against the Nazis for years depriving
yourself of normal food shelter work
relaxation family friends etcetera that
would be asking a lot and hundreds of
thousands millions of people did that
millions of people died fighting the
Nazis all that anyone is asking you to
do to address the animal Holocaust I'll
put my hands in the air - were the quote
unquote animal Holocaust is to stop
eating meat and dairy is to live a vegan
lifestyle in Southern California in Los
Angeles in what is probably the world
capital of luxury quality vegan
restaurants and you with your handsome
income as a university professor with
you're a luxury home in Altadena
California with your SUV that you feel
you can't give up until you have a
bigger hybrid because you like driving
around with your dogs and your bicycles
loaded into the back you can do it it's
asking and incredibly small sacrifice
you're given to me in my mind what leaps
out is you know ok Sam Harris moral
philosopher you can write a whole book
about moral philosophy but you don't
think you can use a slightly less
fashionable cell phone for the sake of
your morals what the hell does that say
about you oh yeah so
michael shermer you see you have this
emotional connection to animals because
you had to gas some of them to death
when you're working in a lab something
to do with vivisection some kind of
animal experimentation I don't know what
exactly uh yeah gee you know and you you
admit that there's a similarity between
what you've seen in these documentaries
and Holocaust you just can't give up the
hamburgers look what the hell does that
say about you it says that you should
not be in a position of leadership
neither as an author nor is a political
leader at cetera it says a lot about you
Michael Shermer it's it's a damning
judgment on your character now in case
you hadn't guessed I am of Jewish ethnic
origin and I do have relatives who died
in the Holocaust in my life I met a new
one Holocaust survivor and I knew people
who were old enough to have memories of
that war on different sides I knew one
guy who grew up in the shadow of the
Nazi side he was a child during World
War two but his parents were Nazis and
so on like you know I'm I'm not really
old enough to have a direct connection
over history but I have some indirect
connections to the echoes of that
chapter of history you know what
there were many moral differences
I mean analogy is by definition a
comparison between two things doesn't
presume they have a lot in common they
might just have one thing in common I
can have two different books on my desk
here that are both read they're
comparable only in the color of the book
they're about different topics nothing
wrong with it nothing wrong with an
analogy with a comparison between two
fundamentally dissimilar things but you
know what as Hobbs says in his famous
book Leviathan man is a wolf to man homo
homini lupus asked when you look at the
history of political massacres in the
history of human civilization the Nazis
are one example the Communists have
plenty of examples to give another funny
example within Spain you know fascist
Spain they massacred people on the
pretext of those people were members of
a freemason conspiracy totally factious
totally false allegations but it was
enough of an excuse to start rounding up
at enemies of the fascist regime and
executing in large numbers to you'd be
surprised that ones less famous in all
of those massacres though the reality is
that human beings really are a threat to
other human beings one of the
justifications given by Nazis themselves
for why the Holocaust happened was that
they didn't want it to be possible for
the next generation of their enemies to
take revenge on so there is fear
involved nobody has this justification
for killing cows you know no look I live
in Canada there is this justification
for killing bears sometimes people get
attacked by bears here and they actually
have to shoot and kill the Bears and
self-defense that's no joke that really
happens in Canada if you've lived in
Canada long enough you've probably met
someone who said that experience it's
not that uncommon depends what part of
Canada you're from sure their attacks
that's one thing but the production of
food that nobody needs and that is not
good for anyone's health that as a
scientific fact is bad for everybody's
health universally unhealthy universally
unnecessary food to produce that through
the suffering and extermination of
animals that are not a threat to you
this will never have the excuse of
self-defense
this will never even
have the excuse of self-aggrandizement
nobody is building an empire this way
nobody is for example conquering Russia
through this violence
nobody is expanding their power or
what-have-you
I am not saying this to excuse mass
murder in history of the world not at
all but in most mass murders there is
either the perceived or actual fear that
if one side doesn't kill the other side
then somehow circumstances will be
reversed and the other side will be the
ones doing the killing in China and
Cambodia under communism part of the
whole reason for the fever-pitch
of exterminating class enemies was
exactly the fear that if you don't kill
them now that counter revolutionaries
will turn around they'll get you look
into the eyes of a cow sometime Michael
Shermer nobody is afraid that the cows
are gonna take over the way the
Communists were afraid that counter
revolutionaries are going to take over
nobody is afraid that the pigs are part
of a conspiracy the way that the
fascists in Spain were afraid that the
Freemasons were all part of a conspiracy
and you know look some time at the
diagram of a cow's skull on the size of
its brain because your justification for
eating meat Michael Shermer is quote I
don't mind eating cows and fish but
dolphins and whales have big brains and
they're cool